In this lesson, you will be introduced to business analytics with Excel. Michael is a fresher and he recently started working as a 
business analyst in an IT company. His manager assigns him a new project that requires him to perform tasks using Excel.
He needs to understand and utilize Excel for many purposes. To complete the project, he has to learn the concept of analytics, 
the types of analytics, and also the areas of analytics with relevant examples.


Let us learn about Business Analytics with Excel with the help of a scenario. Michael has joined as a business analyst in a company. 
John, the functional manager, assigns a task to Michael to observe the company statistics by checking the company's profit and field
of improvements. Michael is new to this field and does not have the expertise to analyze data and create valuable insights out of it. 
To manage and analyze data, he must learn the concepts of data cleaning, data preparation, and data visualization. He must acquaint 
himself with the business analytics approach and understand how to remove duplicates and have an overview of formatting in order to
provide data analytics for the company. He must familiarize himself with business analytics tools like Excel to perform specific 
functions. He lacks experience with data visualization. Therefore, he has to learn different functions like VLOOKUP, HLOOKUP, MATCH, 
etc. He has to put the data in charts and compare the current data with the previous year data. He needs macros to automate tasks that
he needs to perform repeatedly, which will in turn save him a lot of time. He will need to learn how to use SOLVER ADDIN and GOALSEEK 
to find optimal values and understand what value needs to be in an input cell to achieve a desired result in a formula cell.
He will also have to acquaint himself with the concept of moving average so that he can smooth out the data by reducing the impact 
of random fluctuations. Michael will have to understand multiple linear regression so that he can make one plot for each independent
variable versus the residuals. Through this Michael will subsequently be able to analyze the company's data to derive valuable 
insights and drive better business decisions.


Types of Analytics:
There are four distinct types of analytics. 
Descriptive - which explains what has happened, 
Diagnostic - which states why it happened, 
Predictive - depicts what could happen, and 
Prescriptive - talks about what should happen. 

Descriptive analytics. This is known as the simplest class of analytics. This type of analytics 
allows us to break a big chunk of data into smaller pieces, chunking out relevant information from the data or brief synopsis 
of what has happened. 
Example of doing a descriptive analytics of the customer data. 
It includes finding answers to the following questions. 

How many different segments of buyers are we dealing with? 
Where are these buyers located? 
How do high value customers differ? 
What are they interested in? 
What is the income, age, number of children, occupation, and regional breakdown of these buyers? 

Diagnostic analytics is the best option to go for if you want to dig deeper
into the data you have collected and have a better understanding of why things happen. Let us now learn about another type, 
which is predictive analytics.

Predictive analytics is another option available to us to condense data. It uses different statistical data modeling and data 
mining techniques to study the latest and past trends, thereby allowing business analysts and data scientists to make predictions. 
Here's an example of doing predictive analytics for a marketing campaign. It will look for answers to the following questions. 
Who will respond to this campaign? 
For what product and through which channel? 
What are the potential values of each customer and prospect? 
Who will stop the subscription of the services and when would that happen? 

Prescriptive analytics. 
Prescriptive analytics is the last phase of business analytics and is related to both descriptive and predictive analytics. 
While descriptive analytics provide information about what has happened and predictive analytics helps to forecast what might happen, 
which is probabilistic in nature. Prescriptive analytics optimizes decision making by determining the best solution available 
amongst various choices given the business constraints.

Area of Analytics:
1. Customer analytics
2. Industry focused analytics
3. Financial analytics
4. Performance analytics and 
5. Risk analytics. 

1. Customer analytics is a process that helps an organization take critical decisions and deliver offers that are anticipated. 
This analytics offers the organization customer insights necessary to take decisions. Customer analytics uses techniques such as 
market segmentation, predictive analytics, data modeling, and visualization. It plays a pivotal role in the prediction of customer 
behavior. For example, customer acquisition and customer retention. All the telecom companies these days use different marketing
methods to retain their customers. 

2. Financial analytics. This type of analytics is a new way to drive competitive advantage. It helps financial executives 
explore different ways to answer specific financial related business questions and forecast future financial situations. 
In today's dynamic business environment, financial analytics helps the finance function to bring greater value to the organization.
Financial analytics helps companies make multiple views of their data and derive insights that will help them take the necessary 
actions. For example, consolidation of financial statements. Financial statements are reports prepared with the sole purpose of 
maintaining business accounts in a timely manner. These statements showcase the financial position of the company to the market 
stakeholders, shareholders, government, and general public. These statements give a clear and detailed overview of the company's
financial position to investors and creditors as well. 

3. Performance analytics is the practice of using data and technology to study how our business is performing to continuously 
make it better, like managing daily operations, planning strategies, and budgeting for business meetings, service level agreements,
and pinpointing areas of improvement. For example, here in resource management, the performance of the employees is monitored on
a regular basis, keeping in mind the parameters dependent on the type of organization and expectations performance analytics gives 
companies enough time to take corrective actions for improving the performance of the employees in time, if required, thus improving 
the productivity and output of the company risk analytics in today's dynamic business environment, where things change at a rapid 
pace, the rate of risk is very high. The insecurities caused by these risks affect the success of the business.

4. Risk analytics tries to receive the uncertainties of the predicted future and helps evaluate the project success or failure. 
Organizations are trying to define and understand their tolerance level for real. With the help of risk analytics, organizations 
try to manage and mitigate the risk as they can be identified, measured, and planned. Thus allowing decision-makers enough time 
to make wise decisions and corrective action. Risk analytics can be categorized as quantitative risk analysis and qualitative risk 
analysis. Quantitative risk analysis quantifies the possible project results specific to a project. This analysis tries 
to numerically evaluate the possibilities of various adverse events and predict the losses a company would go through if any
of the possibilities come true. Qualitative risk analysis is performed on almost all risks and is not numerically defined.
This method involves defining various project related threats and risks, determining the extent of these risks and proposing 
corrective actions in order to avoid the risk. For example, in banking industry, credit scores are built to predict individual 
delinquency behavior and is used to represent the credit worthiness of an individual. Corruption is understood as an unethical
conduct by a person or group of people to generate illegal profit, generally to acquire personal benefit. It drastically affects 
the confidence and trust of the parties involved and thus hampers the achievement of project goals. 
It's one of the common risks to be taken into account.


Question 1
 Which of the following is similar to predictive analytics?
A: Machine Learning

Question 2
Predictive analytics is based on which of the following?
A: Algorithms

Question 3
Which type of analytics is primarily focused on understanding what has happened in the past?
A: Descriptive analytics

Question 4
Which area of analytics uses statistical models and machine learning techniques to forecast future outcomes?
A: Predictive analytics

Question 5
Which type of analytics helps organizations decide the best course of action among alternatives?
A: Prescriptive analytics



Sort and filter.

The sort and filter functionalities are available in Excel to order or filter the data for further analysis. 
Let us consider an example to understand it. Here we have the results of nine students for the math subject. 
Firstly, let's understand sort functionalities. In order to sort the values based on the CGPA in descending order, go to data tab. 
The pop-up will appear. Under this, first select the CGPA column name and then click on sort and click OK. It will sort the data 
and give you the result like this.

We can do the same on non-numeric columns and multiple columns as well. Let us see how we can sort names in ascending order. 
Under the sort by tab, select name and order as A to Z and click OK. We will get the result in the sorted manner.

Filter option allows us to choose any column we would like to filter the data on. Let us consider the same example. 
Now to filter the data under data tab, click on filter.
For example, we want to see the CGPAs that are greater than or equal to four. 
So we will choose the greater than or equal to option from the dropdown and then mention the number. 
In this case, it is 4.0. Then it will filter all data and give results in this order.


Group by and subtotal.

Group by and ungroup by are available under the data tab within outline section. The group by functionality in Excel allows us to
show necessary data and hide unnecessary data for easy viewing and analysis. We can also create subtotals and outline for a given 
set of data.

Group by can be done for rows or columns. Let us discuss about the steps for grouping data. The first step is to select the rows and 
columns you want to group. Now click on group under data tab. There will be a pop-up tab to choose either rows or columns.
Choose columns and click on okay. This groups the three columns chosen and applies a control to show or hide the group content. 
Clicking on hyphen hides the content, whereas clicking on plus shows the group content.
Similarly for row wise grouping, select the rows you want to group. Click on group under the data tab and then select rows option 
from the dialog box and click on okay. Here again, clicking on hyphen hides the content and clicking on plus shows the group content.
However, we can create a group within a group by choosing rows or columns within the group data. This will be the result.
Let us now learn about ungrouping. The ungroup option allows us to remove the groups created by group. In order to ungroup, 
choose the data already chosen for grouping, either row or column. Click on ungroup under the data tab.
Choose rows to remove row level grouping. Now you will notice that the group chosen will be removed.

Subtotal. Subtotal allows us to create groups and have a subtotal for each group. 
Let us understand this by taking an example. For the following dataset, we can find the total per student by grouping on 
students and adding their marks. Now let us select the data we need to group by and subtotal. Click on subtotal under data tab. 
Now click on the column to which the sum function has to be applied. The subtotaling provides control to group and shows subtotals 
per student.


Text-to-column function 
Text-to-column chart is used to convert raw texts into columns in an Excel sheet. Now, let us learn how to achieve text-to-column 
through an example. Consider the following raw text.
Here, the information such as name, age, address, phone number, and the university is provided in the raw text form. 
First, open the Excel file and paste the raw content into it. Next, choose column A in the sheet. Go to the Data tab in the 
header and click on the text-to-columns. Next, in the dialog box, choose the delimited option, as our data is delimited by commas. 
Hit Next to go to the next step. The next step is to choose the delimiter. The different delimiters can be tab, semicolon, comma, 
space, or any others. Since the elements in the raw text are separated by commas, we will choose a comma. Click Next to go to the 
next step. The text-to-column function considers the elements separated by the delimiters, in this case, the commas, as separate 
entities, and puts each element in a box in an Excel sheet as shown.


Removing duplicates. 
First, let us learn what a duplicate is. Duplicate refers to a copy of the original.
So in order to prevent errors, we have to remove duplicates. In any data analytics work, there will always be cases where we would 
get duplicates in different columns. Excel is very handy in removing duplicates in the data. Duplicates can occur in data and cause
errors in analytics. Duplicates occur when there is an incorrect submission of user data multiple times, when there is a missing 
validation for duplication in the dataset.
Duplicates occur when we merge multiple data sources using joins. And also when data is copy pasted multiple times. 
When duplicates are removed using Excel, we can choose a single column or multiple columns to check the data. Let us consider an 
example to understand it. Choose the column with a set of rows to remove duplicates. Here, you can see that there are many duplicates 
in this column. Let us select the entire column. After selecting it, click on data, then move your cursor to the rightmost side of
the data panel, and then click on remove duplicates. After selecting this option, a pop-up will appear. Since the required column
is selected, all you have to do is select OK and proceed.
Finally, you can see that all the duplicates are removed.


Data validation.
The data in Excel can be validated using some rules set in data validation. Let us understand data validation by considering an 
example. Choose the cell or a group of cells to validate and click on data validation under data tab. It is important to remember 
that the validation applies to new data entered in the cells where rules are placed. Existing data is not validated. After clicking 
on the data validation, a pop-up appears regarding the validation criteria. The following validations are possible. Any value allows 
any alphanumeric value in the cells. Now let us learn about whole number. This validation criteria allows whole numbers and a set of 
rules, including a range of minimum and maximum to be set. Now let us know about list. List allows only a list of values specified 
in a range of cells or written manually in the source input box. Now let us learn about date. This validation criteria allows only 
dates and a set of rules, including a range of minimum and maximum to be set. Let us now learn about time. This validation criteria
allows only time values and a set of rules, including a range of minimum and maximum to be set. Let us now learn about text length.
In this criteria, only text is permitted within the specified length and a set of rules on the length to be set.
Finally, let us know about custom. In this criteria, custom rules on data can be set.

Question 1
In which of the following sections can we find Group By and Subtotal under the data tab?   
A:  Outline

Question 2
Which of the following options can be used for sorting on multiple columns?
A:  Add Level

Question 3
Which of the following options is used to convert text to columns when there is no delimiters?
A: Fixed Width

Question 4
Why do duplicates occur in a dataset?   
A: MIssing Validation

Question 5
Which of the following options in data validation allows us to validate a list of values?
A: List

Question 6
Which of the following range of values can be provided in data validation?   
A: Between (range minimum to maximum)

Question 7
Which of the following options in data validation allows us to validate a list of values?  
A: List

Question 8
Which of the following range of values can be provided in data validation?
A: Between (range minimum to maximum)

Assessment for Foundations of Business Analytics

Question 1
What does prescriptive analytics help with?   
A: Recommend optimal actions

Question 2
Which tool in Excel helps arrange data in a specific order?   
A: SOrt data in ascending or descending order

Question 3
What does the 'Filter' feature in Excel do?   
A: Temporary hide rows based on criteria

Question 4
What is the purpose of the Group By function in Excel?   
A: organize data into categories for analysis

Question 5
What does the Subtotal feature in Excel do?   
A: Calculates totals for grouped data   

Question 6
What is the primary goal of business analytics?  
A: TO make data driven decision

Question 7
Which of the following is NOT a type of analytics?   
A: Reactive analytics

Question 8
Which type of analytics helps identify the cause of past events?   
A: Diagnostic analytics

Question 9
Which type of analytics predicts future outcomes?   
A: Predictive analytics

Question 10
Which analytics area focuses on data summarization?  
A: Descriptive analytics

Question 11
What does Text to Column help you do in Excel?
A: Split text from one column into multiple columns

Question 12
Which Excel feature removes duplicate rows from data?
A: Remove identical entries in a dataset

Question 13
What is the function of Data Validation in Excel?
A: Restrict data entry to define values

Question 14
Which area of analytics involves decision optimization?
A: Prescriptive analytics 

Question 15
Which type of analytics uses machine learning for forecasting?
A:Predictive analytics

Question 16
What does the Sort function allow in Excel?
A: Arrange values based on criteria

Question 17
What is an example of diagnostic analytics?
A: Root cause analysis

Question 18
Which is a benefit of removing duplicates before analysis?
A: Ensures Data accuracy

Question 19
Which Excel tool ensures only valid data is entered in a cell?
A:Restrict input to dropdown options

Question 20
Which of the following is an example of descriptive analytics?
A: Using charts to show monthly sales trends

